Add article 'How to evolve an application - sonarqube (#47)
talk-to-the-duck/talk-to-the-duck.github.io: content/posts/how-to-evolve-application-add-quality/index.md

+++
title = "How to evolve an application to make it more robust and maintainable - Add quality "
description = ""
date = 2023-05-29
featured = false
draft = false
comment = true
toc = true
reward = true
pinned = false
categories = [
"quality", "test", "CICD", "Sonarqube", "Owasp", "Gradle"
]
tags = [
""
]
series = [
" How to evolve an application to make it more robust and maintainable"
]
images = []
+++

<!--more-->

## Foreword

In our last articles we looked at how to add tests and how to run them automatically via the CI/CD (GitHub Actions).
In this article we'll continue to improve the quality of our project using Sonarqube.

## What is Sonarcloud or Sonarqube

> [index.md](..%2FHowTo%2Fhow-to-use-sonarcloud%2Findex.md)

Reviewer: Please can you correctly link this file?

Reviewer 2: Done

## Integration in java project with Gradle

> ### Déclare  plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Declare plugin
```

Reviewer 2: Done

* Add plugin

````groovy 
plugins {

> id("org.sonarqube") version "4.1.0.3113"
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    id("org.sonarqube") version "4.1.0.3113"
}
```

Reviewer 2: Done

````
* Add configuration 
````groovy
sonar {
    properties {
        property "sonar.projectkey", "happraisal"
        property "sonar.projectName", "happraisal"
        property "sonar.host.url", "http://localhost:9000"
        property "sonar.coverage.jacoco.xmlReportPaths", "build/reports/jacoco/all-tests/jacocoAllTestReport.xml"
        property "sonar.sources", "src/main,build.gradle,gradle"
        property "sonar.tests", "src/test,src/integration-test,src/system-test"
        property "sonar.junit.reportPaths", "build/test-results/test,build/test-results/integrationTest,build/test-results/systemTest"
    }
}
````

#### Export results

From intelliJ, via configuration or terminal you can execute :
```` 
clean build jacocoTestReport sonar -Dsonar.login=<<YOUR_ID>> -Dsonar.password=<<YOU_PASSWORD>>

````

If you have created a token you can run 

````
./gradlew clean build jacocoTestReport sonar -Dsonar.login=<<TOUR_TOKEN>>

````

### Multi module

> In project with multi-module each module must execute sonar task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In multi-module projects each module must execute its own sonar task.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

## Tools around Sonar
### Sonar API

> Sonar provides some apis to manage project, quality profile, quality gate and others. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sonar provides some APIs to manage project, quality profile, quality gate and more. 
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> Details can be find [here](https://next.sonarqube.com/sonarqube/web_api/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more details [here](https://next.sonarqube.com/sonarqube/web_api/).
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> You can use tools like postman or curl to use these apis, but the first thing that you must do is to create a token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can call these APIa, you can use http capable tools such as Postman or curl, you have to to create a token.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> To create a token, after you login  go to your profil and in the security tab and create a token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a token, login then go to your profile, then in the security tab create a token.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> For some apis you must create a token with administrator authorizations like 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some APIs such as
```

* /api/qualitygates/select
* /api/projects/search

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you have to create a token with administrator authorizations.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

### Sonarlint

> Sonarlint is a tool that can be used to analyze your code. 

Reviewer: What kind of analisys?

Reviewer 2: Analyse static : analyse effectuée sans exécuter le code.
On détecte: 
- le code smell (to define)
- les erreure de programmation comme les null pointer exception (compilateur ou ide ?)
- duplication de code

La couverture de code ou les alertes i=owasp doivent être executer en local ou dan s la CI et  les rapports envoyés vers SonarCloud ou Sonarqube

#### Configuration 

> * Add plugin sonarlint in IntelliJ

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add a SonarLint plugin to IntelliJ
```

> * Go to Sonarlint settings in Tools/Sonarlint menu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Open the SonarLint settings in Tools/SonarLint menu
```

Reviewer 2: Done

 ![sonarlint-settings.png](sonarlint-settings.png)

> * Add  a SonarCloud or Sonarqube connection.  We select Sonarcloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add  a SonarCloud or Sonarqube connection.  For this article we choset sonarcloud
```

Reviewer 2: Done

![sonarlint-create-connexion.png](sonarlint-create-connexion.png)

> * Click on the link to connect to Sonarcloud service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Click on _the online service_ link to connect to sonarcloud service
```

Reviewer 2: Done

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-login.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-login.png)

> * Set token or create one from the link

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set the token or, if you don't have one yet, create one from the link
```

Reviewer 2: Done

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-connexion-token.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-connexion-token.png)

> * Select your organization

Reviewer: I think we have a missing step here. How does SonarCloud knows the organization?

Reviewer 2: Par default c'est le compte (GithUb ) qui est séléectionné, il est possible de sélectionnner d'autre organisations.

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-organization-choice.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-organization-choice.png)

> * Select notification configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Check the _Receive notifications from SonarCloud_ option
```

Reviewer: Is it the good moment to click on the _Next_ button?

Reviewer 2: Done

Reviewer 2: @dcremonini  to clarify

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-configuration-notification.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-configuration-notification.png)

> * Approve the creation 

Reviewer: Is this the screen displayed after clicking on _Next_?

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-success.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-success.png)

> * bind the project with the connexion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Bind the project with the connection
```

Reviewer 2: Done

![sonarlint-bind-project-with-connexion.png](sonarlint-bind-project-with-connexion.png)

> #### use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How to use SonarLint
```

Reviewer 2: Done

In intelliJ there is a sonarlint window
![intellij-sonarlint-window.png](intellij-sonarlint-window.png)

In this window: 

> * form current file tab you can analyze the file selected and displayed in IntelliJ

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* form the _Current File_ tab you can analyze the file selected and displayed in IntelliJ
```

Reviewer 2: @dcremonini  Ok but why 'the _Current File_' ?

Reviewer: Because there a rule about using the "the" article that says: "Use the article _the_ when an adjective, phrase, or clause describing the noun clarifies or restricts its identity."

In this case there are some tabs and _Current File_ identifies a specific tab.
See [here] (https://www.butte.edu/departments/cas/tipsheets/grammar/articles.html#:~:text=Use%20the%20article%20the%20when%20an%20adjective%2C%20phrase%2C%20or%20clause%20describing%20the%20noun%20clarifies%20or%20restricts%20its%20identity.).

Reviewer 2: Done

> * From report tab you can analyse changed files or all project file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* From the _Report_ tab you can analyse just the changed files or all the files in the project.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

+++

> title = "How to evolve an application to make it more robust and maintainable - Add quality "

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title = "How to evolve an application to make it more robust and maintainable - Add a tool to assess code quality"
```

Reviewer 2: Done

description = ""
date = 2023-05-29
featured = false
draft = false
comment = true
toc = true
reward = true
pinned = false
categories = [
"quality", "test", "CICD", "Sonarqube", "Owasp", "Gradle"
]
tags = [
""
]
series = [
" How to evolve an application to make it more robust and maintainable"
]
images = []
+++

<!--more-->

## Foreword

> In our last articles we looked at how to add tests and how to run them automatically via the CI/CD (GitHub Actions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous articles of this series we looked at how to add tests and how to run them automatically via the CI/CD we configured in GitHub Actions.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

In this article we'll continue to improve the quality of our project using Sonarqube.

> ## What is Sonarcloud or Sonarqube

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What are Sonarcloud and Sonarqube?
```

Reviewer 2: Done

More information could be found in this [post](../howto/how-to-use-sonarcloud/)

> ## Integration in java project with Gradle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Integration in Java project with Gradle
```

> ## Integration in java project with Gradle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Integration in Java project with Gradle
```

Reviewer 2: Done

### Declare  plugin
* Add plugin

````groovy 
plugins {
    id("org.sonarqube") version "4.1.0.3113"
}

````
* Add configuration 
````groovy
sonar {
    properties {
        property "sonar.projectkey", "happraisal"
        property "sonar.projectName", "happraisal"
        property "sonar.host.url", "http://localhost:9000"
        property "sonar.coverage.jacoco.xmlReportPaths", "build/reports/jacoco/all-tests/jacocoAllTestReport.xml"
        property "sonar.sources", "src/main,build.gradle,gradle"
        property "sonar.tests", "src/test,src/integration-test,src/system-test"
        property "sonar.junit.reportPaths", "build/test-results/test,build/test-results/integrationTest,build/test-results/systemTest"
    }
}
````

#### Export results

> From intelliJ, via configuration or terminal you can execute :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From IntelliJ, via configuration or terminal you can execute:
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> From intelliJ, via configuration or terminal you can execute :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From IntelliJ, via configuration or terminal you can execute:
```

Reviewer 2: Done

```` 
clean build jacocoTestReport sonar -Dsonar.login=<<YOUR_ID>> -Dsonar.password=<<YOU_PASSWORD>>

````

If you have created a token you can run 

````
./gradlew clean build jacocoTestReport sonar -Dsonar.login=<<TOUR_TOKEN>>

````

### Multi module

> In project with multi-module each module must execute sonar task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In project with multi-module each module must execute then sonar task.
```

## Tools around Sonar
### Sonar API

> Sonar provides some APIs to manage project, quality profile, quality gate and others. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sonar provides some APIs to manage projecst, quality profiles, quality gates and other. 
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> You can find more details [here](https://next.sonarqube.com/sonarqube/web_api/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more details [here](https://next.sonarqube.com/sonarqube/web_api/) .
```

Reviewer: I made this suggestion because the dot doesn't appear. Not sure if my suggestion works though.

Reviewer 2: Done

> Before you can call these APIs, you can use http capable tools such as Postman or curl, you have to to create a token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can call these APIs, you have to create a token. You can use http capable tools such as Postman or curl.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> To create a token, login then go to your profile, then in the security tab and create a token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a token, login to the SonarQube or SonarCloud web user interface and go to your profile, then go to the security tab and create a token.
```

Reviewer 2: Done

For some APIs such as
* /api/qualitygates/select
* /api/projects/search

 you have to create a token with administrator authorizations.

> ### Sonarlint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SonarLint
```

Reviewer 2: Done

> Sonarlint is a tool that can be used to analyze your code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SonarLint is a tool that can be used to analyze source code. 
```

Reviewer 2: Done

#### Configuration 
* Add a SonarLint plugin to IntelliJ
* Open the SonarLint settings in Tools/SonarLint menu
 ![sonarlint-settings.png](sonarlint-settings.png)

> *  For this article we chose sonarcloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  For this article we chose SonarCloud
```

Reviewer 2: Done

![sonarlint-create-connexion.png](sonarlint-create-connexion.png)

* Click on _the online service_ link to connect to Sonarcloud service

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-login.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-login.png)

> * Set the token or, if you don't have one yet, create one from the link

Reviewer: Please can you specify the link?

Reviewer 2: Done

![sonarlint-sonarcloud-connexion-token.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-connexion-token.png)

* Select your organization
![sonarlint-sonarcloud-organization-choice.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-organization-choice.png)

* Check the _Receive notifications from SonarCloud_ option
![sonarlint-sonarcloud-configuration-notification.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-configuration-notification.png)

* Approve the creation 
![sonarlint-sonarcloud-success.png](sonarlint-sonarcloud-success.png)

* Bind the project with the connection
![sonarlint-bind-project-with-connexion.png](sonarlint-bind-project-with-connexion.png)

####  How to use SonarLint

> In intelliJ there is a sonarlint window

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In IntelliJ there is a SonarLint window
```

Reviewer 2: Done
